feat: split authorization from access (#36)
web3-storage/specs: w3-session.md

## Premise

Mapping cryptographic [`did:key`] identifier to an identity with memorable identifier like [`did:mailto`] MUST be authorized by the identity owner. When identity is identified with a a non-cryptographic identifier authorization is not self-evident from the UCAN delegation and requires performing out-of-bound authentication like [DID resolution] or an email based confirmation flow.

To keep UCANs verifiable in stateless settings we propose capturing stateful information (out-of-bound authorization) in a stateless [session], represented using a UCAN, so it can be included in verifiable proofs.

### Authorization

An agent MAY request an authorization [session] by invoking `access/authorize` capability that specifies desired identity (`nb.as`) and session key (`with`).
Capability provider (notary) MUST carry out-of-bound authentication that allows identity owner to accept or deny authorization request.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  participant Agent as 👩‍💻<br/><br/>did:key:zAgent
  participant W3 as 🌐<br/><br/>did:web:web3.storage #32;
  participant Email as 📬<br/><br/>alice@web.mail

  Agent ->> W3: access/authorize

>   Note right of Agent:🎟<br/>with: did:key:zAgent<br/>as: did:mailto:alice@web.mail

Reviewer: Please can we be consistent with `did:mailto:alice@web.mail` or `did:mailto:web.mail:alice`?

Author: ```suggestion
  Note right of Agent:🎟<br/>with: did:key:zAgent<br/>as: did:mailto:web.mail:alice
```
Good catch, I have missed to update it here.

>   Note right of Agent:🎟<br/>with: did:key:zAgent<br/>as: did:mailto:alice@web.mail

Author: ```suggestion
  Note right of Agent:🎟<br/>with: did:key:zAgent<br/>as: did:mailto:web.mail:alice
```

  W3 ->> Email: ✉️ Verification email
  Email ->> W3: 🔗 Approve
  W3 -->> Agent: ./update
    Note right of Agent:🎫<br/>with: did:web:web3.storage<br/>key: did:key:zAgent
```

#### Authorization Example

> Request authorization from `alice@web.mail` with `did:key:zAgent`.

```ts
{
  "iss": "did:key:zAgent",        // agent
  "aud": "did:web:web3.storage",  // notary
  "att": [{
    "with": "did:key:zAgent",     // session key
    "can": "access/authorize",
    "nb": { as: "did:mailto:web.mail:alice" }  // identity
  }]
}
```

#### Authorization Principal

The `nb.as` field MUST specify a principal that requesting agent wishes to represent in authorized session. It MUST be valid [UCAN principal] so that it can be used as issuer (`iss`) in UCANs covered by authorized session.

#### Authorization Key

Resource (`with`) MUST be a [`did:key`][] identifier for the desired session key. It represents a key that agent wishes to use for signing [UCAN][]s that it will issue using authorization principal.

> Please note that session key `with`, MAY be different or same as the issuing agent DID (`iss`).

### Authentication

> Agent providing `access/authorize` capability (notary) MUST carry out-of-bound process in which authorizing principal may confirm or deny authorization. Process MAY vary based on type of identity.

Reviewer 2: > based on type of identity

Does this mean something different than 'based on DID method'?

Author: Probably no, but perhaps there will be a case. I don't think it's worth committing to that exactly.

#### Example [`did:mailto`] authorization

Notary MAY issue authorization [session] after verifying that specified [`did:key`] is authorized by either:

- Performing [`did:mailto` resolution] and ensuring it is listed under [capability invocations] when [DKIM-Signature] is provided.

- Perform out-of-bound verification by sending an email to the corresponding address with a callback link that can authorize requested [`did:key`].

> #### Example [`did:web`]

Reviewer 2: love to have this in here!

Notary MAY issue authorization [session] after performing [DID resolution] and either:

- Ensuring that specified [`did:key`] is authorized to perform [capability invocations].
- Carry [DID authentication] using challenge-response protocol.

### Authorization context

Notary MUST issue [session] for the [authorization] request that was approved. This enables authorized agents (ones with access to session private key) to use UCANs covered by this [session].

> Authorization context extends to the principals that trust that notary has carried out authorization process is good faith.

Author: ```suggestion
Authorization context extends to the principals that trust that notary has carried out authorization process in good faith.
```

> To make it more concrete consider following scenario: **Alice** shares **Bobs** contact info with **Mallory** from her address book.
>
> **Mallory** assumes shared phone number belongs to **Bob** because she trusts **Alice** to act in good faith.

#### Delegated Trust

> Trust in notary CAN explicitly be captured via [session] delegating, in which case notary SHOULD re-delegate it. This allows modelling complex trust relationships where trusted authority delegates trust to some intermediary principal which (re)delegates this trust to the notary that issued a [session].

Author: ```suggestion
Trust in notary CAN explicitly be captured via [session] delegating, in which case notary SHOULD re-delegate it. This allows modeling complex trust relationships where trusted authority delegates trust to some intermediary principal which (re)delegates this trust to the notary that issued a [session].
```

## Session

Session is UCAN issued by (trusted) notary (`iss`) and proof that notary has verified that authorizing principal (`aud`) has approved use of session key (`with`) in the context of this session.

In other words notary has ensured that principal in `aud` field has approved UCAN issued by it to be signed using (`with`) key.

### Session Example

> > Proof that `did:mailto:web:mail:alice` can issue UCANs signed with `did:key:zAgent` session key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Proof that `did:mailto:web.mail:alice` can issue UCANs signed with `did:key:zAgent` session key.
```

Authority MAY choose to trust principal other than itself and therefor extend authorization context to those principals.

### Session Principal

Audience of the [UCAN][] MUST be a non-cryptographic identifier of the authorizing principal. It MUST match [`nb.as`][authorization principal] of the corresponding authorization request.

> This ensures [principal alignment] when [session] is used as a proof in [UCAN][] issued by the authorizing principal.

### Session Key

The `nb.key` field MUST be set to [`did:key`][] identifier of the session key. It MUST be the same DID as [`nb.with`][authorization key] of the authorization request.

## Session Scope

Authorization [session] covers UCANs that include it in their [proofs] and are subject to UCAN [time bounds][] and [revocations][ucan revocation]. Only UCANs meeting standard [principal alignment] requirement are covered by the [session], meaning UCAN MUST be issued by the `aud` of the included [session].

## Session Extensions

The `./update` capability provides functionality roughly equivalent of [`Set-Cookie`][] HTTP header. It allows capturing stateful information in the stateless UCAN delegations.

> Capability MAY include arbitrary session information besides `key` which MUST ignored in the context of this specification, or put it differently have no how authorization [session] handling.

Author: ```suggestion
Capability MAY include arbitrary session information besides `key` which MUST be ignored in the context of this specification, or put it differently MUST NOT impact authorization [session] handling.
```
